[Music]
all right thank you you dressed up just
for me good thank you
coming to Oxford this evening and
joining us um I wanted to start and as
you will know Hillary Clinton has just
released her book what happened and I
thought perhaps this could inspire the
start of our interview what happened
could you talk us through from the phone
call from the president asking you to be
the communications director to how just
ten days into the job you were fired
okay so so first of it was 11 days I
mean don't get me out of the one day cuz
it's nine point one percent of my
federal career okay so no so it was 11
day 11 days and so what would actually
happen was I was at the XM Bank and I
was the chief strategy officer there and
I got a call from Ivanka who asked to to
meet with me
and then she called her dad and her dad
was off the so if you've ever been in
the West Wing the Oval Office is in the
back by the Rose Garden you may get
there someday some of you or some of the
Americans may get there and there's a
there's a den and a little study the
president's got this big 70 inch
flat-screen TV in there so he's in there
watching television with his DVR and I
walked in and we had a conversation
about things that he needed to change
and so since it was a privileged
conversation I can't go into too much
detail about it but he asked me to take
on that role and that was Thursday at
4:30 I said to the president you realize
that there's gonna be more than one
person on your team that doesn't want me
to have that role and he said yeah I
totally realized that he said but show
up at 10 o'clock and you'll have the
role
those guys they spent the whole evening
trying to prevent me from getting the
role and at 10 o'clock the next morning
in the Oval Office I was appointed the
comms director and then the president
turned to me and said okay I want you to
do the press conference today so I said
okay no problem
when I walked back in
the press-secretary area there was 30
people from the comms team there and
they said okay we're here to brief you
on the press conference that you're
about to have and I said okay get out of
the office I don't need the briefing
because I didn't want to get clouded by
whatever they were going to say they
didn't know any of them and so I did the
the press briefing and then I did the
job that the president asked me to do
and you mentioned a little bit of it but
what did the president ask me to do is
to find and identify who were
perpetrating the biggest amount of leaks
inside the administration and then to
you know effectively remove a lot of
those people and so you don't need to
know a lot about Washington to know that
the minute I was declared the hatchet
man that my duration in Washington was
going to be very short-lived because as
soon as I was declared the hatchet man
the knives got longer and longer as a
result of some of my adversaries I told
Steve Colbert who's the American
late-night comedian that he asked me how
long I was gonna last I said well I
thought I was gonna beat a carton of
milk you know I didn't think I was gonna
get blown out of there before your milk
got spoiled in the refrigerator but I
didn't think I was in the last more than
30 or 60 days there was no there was no
way given the magnitude of what had to
happen that I thought that was gonna be
possible and then talked us through the
firing sorry it's a just 11 days later
um well the firing was sort of weird
because you know it was unclear up until
that morning whether or not I was gonna
be in the job or not in the job but I
can tell you how I learned that I was
gonna be in the job I don't want to go
into the conversations because again
those conversations are privileged but I
will tell you how I learned that I was
going to be in the job you get issued a
white house like that phone which is a
security encrypted phone so that your
White House email and your cellular
transmissions are more or less heavily
encrypted relative to your regular phone
and so when I landed I was in I went
with the president on Friday to West
Islip which is Long Island was where I
he gave a speech on ms-13 the gangs and
what we were doing to like stop the gang
violence in America and so I stayed home
over the weekend visited my family and
so I took the seven o'clock the six
o'clock shuttle back to Washington when
I landed I went to turn the White House
Batphone on and it wasn't working see ya
and then I knew I was a dead man look at
the phone I said oh man this is not
gonna be a good day for me and so I will
tell you this I got fired at 9:37 but it
didn't come out until 2 o'clock in the
afternoon see that so we had them we had
the leakers on the run ok they were not
gonna leak the information they started
leaking again now it's a different sort
of leaking than the one that was going
on prior to that episode it's a
different style of leaking but the
biggest story of the day was my firing
it didn't leak which I thought was sort
of fun and ironic and when the the
firing itself was because of the the
journalists leaking and is that what you
think he was well how many people in the
room but just have a little
participation when the oil how many
people in the room think it was the
journalists and the interview that got
me fired raise your hands how many
people think it was something else what
do you think it was Chris well I think
given that you just thought that it's
probably not probably wasn't that but
you know let me tell you something about
Washington okay it's like the game of
Thrones
screenwriters got together with the
Hunger Games screenwriters
and then they met the house of cards
guys and then they wrote the script if
you follow what I'm saying but it wasn't
that they trust me on that it wasn't
that you if you do your research on it
that was used as an excuse but that
really wasn't it at the end of the day
and and I owed this to general Kelley
once he became chief of staff it was
incumbent upon him to want to shape the
staff to his liking and so he made the
decision to fire me and as an American
entrepreneur and as somebody that's run
two companies and frankly started two
companies I owed that to him I couldn't
really even fight that actually because
at the end of the day as a CEO if
someone put me in a job and I thought I
needed to replace a few people for
personality reasons or other reasons you
know when you're in a corporation or
you're in a startup or even a political
administration like that you sort of
have to allow people to put their own
imprimatur on the situation what became
clear I just want to point one other
thing out okay there was an Access
Hollywood tape everybody remember that
one okay so it wasn't that terrible of a
thing the three curse words to the
reporter who dishonestly recorded me
wasn't that terrible for me wasn't a
good thing I didn't say that it wasn't
that terrible
I'm sorry what what what became clear
from our conversation upstairs were that
either a your political views of diff
very different to to president Trump's
or your political views are quite
similar but those surrounding president
Trump have made him lean further to the
right then then he would be if he was
acting on his own that to me either says
that he you what came out was that you
very much suggested that it was those
around him that had the most influence
and he had a very little say himself
despite being the president I didn't I
well if he came across that way at
dinner I didn't I didn't want it to come
across that way what I want what I would
prefer to have you think about it in the
following context that in my mind and
for the 20 years that I knew the
president that he was primarily what I
would call a New York style Republican
and so mostly are from New York so I'll
sort of explain that where you have some
social progressivism and you have some
more Republican ideas about the free
market I think that the president is
still in many respects this is my
fundamental belief he stole in many
respects that way but I think one of the
problems is is the way the communication
is coming out of the White House and the
way some of his strategist strategist
you get what I'm saying
okay portrayed him and portrayed himself
is probably not super successful for the
administration so I believe that there
will be a pivot in the next six to
twelve months where the president will
do what he's very good at it'll start
cutting a deal you saw him reach out to
the left-leaning leaders in our country
Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer he's done
that twice now he cut a deal with them
on the debt ceiling
he's got the dreams Act immigration
bargaining chip on the table with them
right now and so I do think he pivots
and where he has come across perhaps as
more right
he probably isn't really that way my
guess is he'll pivot into the center
here well let's look at an example he
issued that executive order on
transgender troops for example and just
as you arrived one of the first things
you asked me was well firstly my
political view and secondly my my view
on same-sex marriage and you also
described yourself this evening as a
LGBTQ activist how then can you tell me
you guys some of you guys are surprised
by that right because I supported
trumpet but you know for the last ten
years I've actually you know been a gay
rights activist in New York in fact if
you do your homework what you'd learn
about me is I was part of that movement
that got the four Republican senators in
the state of New York to vote on
marriage equality I also funded Chad
Griffin from the Human Rights Campaign
on the proposition 8 Supreme Court case
that Ted Olson brought with David Boies
so you had a right-leaning Solicitor
General Republican minded and David
Boies who had worked for Vice President
Gore bring that case of the Supreme
Court which led to marriage equality
throughout the land I've also worked
with Vice President Biden if you
remember your American political history
or at least current event history it was
really Vice President Biden that came
out and said that President Obama should
support the gay rights movement and to
go really far back you know President
Obama was against gay marriage in 2008
and so what you should be comforted by
your generation frankly has already
litigated this issue I don't think
people in your generation frankly care
who marries who I certainly do not I
have gay family members and you know I I
said to Chris and some of his friends
that the Declaration of Independance
life liberty and the pursuit of
happiness you know maybe that was
written in a patriarchal time in our
society but I think today it doesn't
mean just for state straight people life
liberty and the pursuit of happiness it
means for everybody so so I'm the
unabashed in my support of marriage
equality as I have done for
eleven years since I've started in that
movement I wasn't saying that to
question actually you're whether you're
an LGBT activist or not but that is
clearly one of the things that has
become apparent and and that is just one
of many examples in which your views or
at least the actions that have come out
from the Trump administration differ
from president Trust why then a what did
Trump see in you given these differences
given that you are more liberal a
seemingly okay so and secondly why let
me take a job let me frame that for you
think is important and I and I said this
to you and you should really think about
this because words actually do matter or
not not just the curse words there are
other words that actually matter
sometimes it depends I would neighbor
again but but you know what I tell
people is that I'm socially inclusive
and I'm fiscally responsible and so I'll
explain that because if I tell people
that I'm socially liberal in the United
States they spent billions of dollars on
getting half of the United States they
hate the word liberal and if I tell
people that I'm fiscally conservative
well guess what billions of dollars have
been spent on that word to get half of
the United States hate the word
conservative and so so for me the
framework that I've always operated in
in terms of my political ideology is
that I'm socially inclusive and fiscally
responsible so to answer your question I
am a Republican I was you know born in
the age of Reagan and Thatcher I went to
college thirty three short years ago
which you guys are in college now but
you'll be blown away about how quickly
that goes by and so my recommendation to
you is that you're you're here living in
a bus station you should live without
fear I should do the things that you
really want to do in your life but for
me I got raised as a Republican I've
worked in the Republican Party I
supported one democrat and that was a
law school classmate of mine Barack
Obama and so in 2008 if you do your
research on me I politically bundled for
Barack Obama in 2008 raised the money
gave him personal money because we knew
each other in school and to this day
even though my political leanings are
different than his on some issues I
still respect him as a person but I have
been other than that one campaign I
than a Republican so you may know this
about me or not but I backed Governor
Walker and then after I got Governor
Walker I was with the Jeb Bush campaign
so I so that was slow edit low-energy
somebody lives there but when I said Jeb
Bush most of the Americans heard low
energy right so you have to you have to
give the candidates from pretty pretty
effective at making those sorts of
comments right but but when I when I
when I went with then candidate Trump it
was because I'm a team playing
Republican and I said consistently in
the American media that I was going to
back the eventual nominee and so here's
what I would say to everybody in this
room and it's a great line by the former
mayor of New York mayor Koch once said
if you believe in nine out of the twelve
things that I'm saying you should vote
for me if you believe in 12 out of the
12 things I'm saying you need a
psychiatrist and the point being is that
you're never going to find a politician
that matches your five finger
fingerprints it's not gonna happen if
you find that person quit your day job
and go work for that person he or she
that I'm gonna tell you that we're in a
very very complex society we've got very
complex things going on right now
domestically here in the UK domestically
in the United States but also
internationally and so I think it's
gonna be very hard for people in this
room to Fivefinger fingerprint to a
politician identically so the president
is a Republican leaning person he has
set forth a process of deregulation in
the country which is helping the
business community you've mentioned the
transgender thing the cheiron's gender
thing was reversed by mattis you didn't
see the president push back on that and
so you know I think there's been a lot
of social progress made and these are
for some people very tough decisions for
for me a decision like that as a
no-brainer but for some people in our
society there are tough decisions and so
what I don't like about what's going on
right now is that we have major major
polarization at a time when we need
major major collaboration and so
we got to fix that and you know I can
tell you I can't speak for Great Britain
but I would imagine sort of the same
thing going on here but we have to fix
that in the United States because it's
still twenty three point six percent of
the GDP of the world it has the most
powerful military by a factor of ten you
could take the next military spending of
the next ten leading nations you don't
add up to the United States and so we've
got to make that organism that political
organism worked better than it is right
now do you do you look back on your
tenure as director communications as a
success or as a failure and both
personally and for the Trump
administration um
well getting fired sucks okay let's just
put it that way okay I mean you you know
that's not the first time we've been
fired if you asked me I can tell you my
first time I get fired it was also not
fun but again you have to understand
that like if you're asked to do a job
like that for the president United
States some of you probably file sports
if you're in baseball and you get hired
as a manager guess why you're the day
you got hired is a day that you're
planning your firing and so the job that
I got hired into and the specific role
that I was given above and beyond being
the communications director was going to
lead to my eventual departure so was it
too abrupt for my liking
absolutely but here's something that I
will tell you about life there can be no
whining in life I'm not a whiner I got
fired I took it like a man or a woman
and I walked out of there I said why not
I get myself in trouble because you got
that taped on but my my my my point is
is that like in sports and politics
there are winners and losers and when
you're on the losing side of something
the worst thing that you can do is crawl
into a hole now I will make an
observation for everybody in this room
that reasonably effective communicator
have an interesting background I grew up
on a blue-collar family and yet I got
myself into Tufts and Harvard Law School
and I we were talking about student loan
crisis you know I says I had a fund that
myself and then I ended up at Goldman
I built a couple of businesses but in
Washington the opportunity now is the
politics of personality disruption so if
you're effective the opposing side needs
to mash you into a two dimensional
caricature to dehumanize you so that
your voice can't be heard and so if you
allow that to happen to you then I'll
speak to every student in this room
under no circumstances can you allow
that to happen to you in life and so if
you were gonna get some advice for me to
take away tonight the three pieces of
advice that I'd give everybody in this
room is number one shouldn't really care
what other people think of you I'll live
to your true self number two if you get
caught in a situation like me the only
time that it's over is when you make the
decision to quit it's not when somebody
else declares it being over and the
third thing is if you're not having fun
because again you're only here visiting
if you're not having fun then don't do
it and I can tell you that and it was 11
days I had a blast I was I never I had a
great time I was on Air Force One three
times I'm hanging out in the Oval Office
with the president you can tell I'm a
pretty upfront guy so you could imagine
that there were colorful conversations
between me and the President of the
United States we're both new yorkers and
so you know we're both prone to some
drama and i probably and so you know it
was it was an interesting period of time
and i wouldn't change it for anything in
other words if you told me right now i'd
have to go back into that situation and
have the humiliating experience of being
fired like that what i do it and the
answer is yes
thousand percent sigh meeow okay looking
at president Trump's communication
strategies so is there a strategy
firstly is the entire communication
space
thank you is the entire communications
based just reactive of his Twitter well
you know here's something I will tell
you that I'd found is that when the
president feels like he's being well
defended
I think his tweets are more focused on
public policy and they're more focused
on like reaching over the top of the
mainstream media and the United States
and going directly to the American
people when the president doesn't feel
that he's being super ly well defended
then you get like conversations about
Micah's facelift and things like that so
you know if it were up to me I would
recommend more on policy and more on
substance and more on the prosecution of
his legislative agenda and less on that
other stuff so but but I do think that
hope Hicks who replace me is a terrific
person Sarah Huckabee one of the first
things that I did was named her the
press secretary I think she does a very
good job for the President on television
she's the first mom in that position
she's got three young children at home
I'll tell you a quick story about
management because I think it's
important to you if you ever go to run a
company so at 10:30 the bomb hits that
I'm the communications director at 10:13
Sean Spicer quits thank thank God he
quit because I was going to fire him but
I mean quit and so you know and by the
way anyway never by the way I never I
never called him Melissa McCarthy okay
that was like a false
I never called him I called him liar
spice from the Spice Girls okay every
Spice Girls got a nickname and so I gave
him one too okay so he was liar spice he
wasn't melissa mccarthy but but when he
when he left he had the very big office
on that side of the west wing and then
the communications director has a small
office so Shan at that time was de facto
communications director and press
secretary Sarah came to me she's a very
gracious person from the south and she
said mr. scanner Moochie I said call me
Anthony mr. scaramouche is my my dad she
said well I want to give you the big
office and so if you know the West Wing
the offices are very small but the press
secretary's office is as large as the
chief of staff's office because you know
they designed it that way Teddy
Roosevelt designed it that way so that
when the press was in there and they did
a press gaggle they could fit the press
in that office and I said to Sarah Sarah
you're the press secretary even though I
have seniority over you you're gonna be
in the press secretary's office number
one I'm a traditionalist and number two
you've earned the the job moreover I'm
an entrepreneur I could run my business
off of my cell phone inside of a phone
booth I don't need a big office and so
it's a learning lesson for people in
this room that when you're managing a
company one of the things that you
should always think about is not care so
much who gets the credit because you can
sort of get anywhere you want in life as
long as you don't care who gets the
credit or who gets the position you know
control your own ego you mentioned Sean
Spicer why was he so opposed to you why
was it that instant that he well it was
a combination of factors I think him and
rights were very opposed to me this is
another learning lesson from that
experience if you are a political donor
which I was you could find the amounts
of money that I gave to the president in
his campaign and his pack online so I
won't go into that but it was a
significant sum of money I also gave a
significant sum of money to the RNC I
did media appearances with the president
that if you total the media appearances
it was over 100 million dollar
of media by meaning if I we had to buy
that advertising time on MSNBC or fox or
these other affiliates it would have
cost about a hundred million dollars and
then I went out and bundled for the
president so I was a triple threat in
terms of the campaign but this is an
axiomatic fact of American politics when
you are a donor there are two jobs
available to you if you're a political
outsider the two jobs that are available
to you are the ambassadorship or you can
be on one of these councils you can be
on the president's foreign intelligence
advisory board you can be on its import
export council you can be on the
competitive Council like Steve
Schwarzman is with Jamie Dimon but what
you can't be you can't be inside the
president's inner circle and one of his
political operatives as an assistant to
the president because that's a huge
threat to the permanent political class
inside of Washington and so when the
president gave me my first job which was
the OPL directorship both rights and
Shaun worked in that game of thrones
like manner and that house of cards like
matter to block that position on me and
so it was seven months later when I got
in and then they said oh geez you know
he got in despite our efforts time for
me to go
Reince wasn't as smart as Sean so said
the truth looking at the US political
system as a whole what gives you more
power money or public office it's really
good questions so it really depends so
if it depends on what you want to do as
an example if President Clinton was here
tonight and you said mr. president
because I've asked him this direct
question have you done more good for the
world being president or did you do more
good for the world in your foundation
the president would say as president
because with a stroke of a pen through
executive privileges and sort of
discretionary spending of the president
you know you can wave billions of
dollars around the world george w bush
doesn't get hardly any credit for this
but bono gives him credit for
he single-handedly waived several
billion dollars into the continent of
Africa in the mid-2000s which led to a
direct reduction in malaria mortalities
and so he doesn't get a lot of credit
from that from the left-leaning press
but the lead singer for you to give them
credit for that there's many people in
these African communities that give him
credit for that and so it depends on
what you want to do if you want to
organize the political system and you
want to influence a lot of politicians
money will make a very big difference
for you but I don't think there's
anything more powerful in our country
than being the president United States
in terms of what your discretionary
powers are and the influence that you
can have in the society so I would go
with public office looking at that a bit
more what role should private wealth
plan politics whether through direct
representation or interest groups I mean
so this is the biggest debate in our
country now so after the citizens united
Supreme Court decision which basically
the Supreme Court ruled that money was a
form of freedom of speech and freedom of
expression in the democracy you were
able to give an unlimited amount of
money to a political action committee to
wield your influence many poor allistic
democracies were sited against that
they've opted for some kind of campaign
finance reform or some kind of medium
ground where there's a flat playing
field no matter how much money is
involved I have taken the position and
so far I've been proven right and maybe
long-term I'll be proven wrong but I
have taken the position I actually wrote
an op-ed about this when the Citizens
United case came out that the ideas in
America would matter way more than the
money because what's happened now is
that we've dematerialization studio or a
radio studio today you can take out your
phone which is a television studio in a
radio studio and you can broadcast live
on Facebook you can broadcast live on
Twitter I firmly believe that the
president President Trump without the
tool of Twitter likely would have not
won the election I think that the that
tool was a very effective campaign
device for him
the president was outspent by Secretary
Clinton I used to know the numbers
exactly but I think she outspent us 1.7
times what we had versus what she had
and she had more personnel than us by
two point four times and so she she out
personnel Duss and she outspent us and
yet we still won the election so so it's
not clear to me that the money is as
important as the ideas now you made the
point at dinner which I'll reference is
that it may matter more in a local
election like a congressional seat or a
Senate race or perhaps a gubernatorial
seat and I will see two on that I do
think it matters more there and so it
doesn't seem like at least this is my
opinion that the duopoly in America
which is basically the Democrats and the
Republicans want to give up the citizen
united thing any time soon
in fact President Obama who was against
it and you may remember this was against
it actually formed a political action
committee in 2012 and he was criticized
for doing it and he said well hold on a
second I have no choice but to do it
because the other side is arming up in
this way I have to commend our MUP as
well and so I think that's where the
parties are right now so I think it
doesn't really matter what I think it's
probably not going to change my final
question before we open up to the
audience what's next for you do you are
you going to pursue a role in politics a
further role in politics
I'm going to pursue a 12-day role that's
gonna be my my god I'm gonna look for
something that lasts 12 days no like
it'll be like the 12 days of course you
know the the funny thing about this is
like it's now a unit of time people say
like I just went on vacation for a
scaramouche you know like 11 days
but try to get a 12-day role no I I said
I'm gonna I'm an entrepreneur I'm a
business person I'm probably gonna start
up another company I'm looking at right
now the student loan space of interested
to hear the take here in the United
Kingdom but we have a student loan
crisis in the United States there's 1.4
trillion dollars of student loans
outstanding each student has something
like 40 pretty much similar to what goes
on in the UK it's forty to sixty
thousand dollars worth of student loans
outstanding they're having a hard time
repaying those loans and there might be
some business ideas around that to help
solve that problem so I'm looking at
that I'll probably get more active and
more involved in television in some
respects I think that there's an
opportunity and again this is not to say
that I'm a centrist because I don't
think of myself as a centrist but I do
think that there's an opportunity to
create space for more collaboration and
I do believe that the generation of men
and women that are sitting in this room
right now
I've sort of gotten a raw deal from the
baby boomers which I happen to be a
member of I think the political class in
the West the baby boomers they were
handed a baton from the greatest
generation that fought the Second World
War and they've sort of squandered the
treasure of the West we've over promised
people we've deficit spent into oblivion
we're prosecuting wars that we don't
really have a sound strategy for
properly exiting from and so
unfortunately you guys are going to
inherit this and I'm hoping that you
inherit it without the polarity and the
extremists that we've experienced in my
generation and so I'm hoping to be a
part of that in some way shape or form
going forward maybe that'll last longer
than 12 days I don't know what to say
great thank you so much thank you we're
now gonna open up to the audience if you
have a question raise your hand nice and
high and wait into a microphone
come see so let's start with you in the
red yeah
just wait for a microphone to come
mr. mooch thank you so much for being
here we're also thrilled so both your
rise in your fall within the White House
coincided with really big power shifts
with the chief of staff so when you
first came in you reported directly to
the president over the chief of staff
which is not a typical reporting
structure okay so you're pretty smart
you go to Oxford right so why do you
think that was right well obviously he
went bye-bye but the whole point to of
your of your exit as well was the chief
of staff coming in and taking power back
so my question is is a prerequisite to a
functioning White House a chief of staff
who has all the authority and all the
reporting prisms yes I think it depends
on the president it depends on the chief
of staff I mean there's a great book
Chris Whipple just wrote a great book
called the gatekeepers and he he goes
back to the chief of staff position in
the United States was actually created
by General Eisenhower when he became
president he took his former chief of
staff from the Army and moved him into
that position because he thought he
needed to organize and institutionalize
it if you know your presidential history
John Kennedy did not have a chief of
staff for a couple of years so he tried
to disavow it and it turned out that
because the government was getting
bigger and much more complex that you
needed that sort of filter if you will
to the president so it really depends on
the personalities I think general Kelley
is an American patriot I have a lot of
respect for him I am NOT sore him at all
for firing me however and this is not me
giving him advice through YouTube or
anything like that but I do think that
there's like a whole jar of sugar
cookies that the chief of staff can give
out to people and if general Kelley was
slightly more political I think he could
be very helpful to the President on his
legislative agenda and so one of the
hallmarks of his success in life is that
he was a a political four-star general
but in many ways what you find about
that chief of staff position if you
understand the history of it you were
also operating with some level
political interest that's on-site with
the president and so I don't think it's
about the power structure as much as
it's about the personalities and the
deployment of the personalities so you
think that though it would have been
sustainable for you to continue to
report directly to the president as well
as having oh me personally no I would
have very gladly subordinated myself to
general Kelly I would have had no no
problem doing that didn't didn't give me
a chance to do that by the way but but
there it was reported in the press that
I had a conversation with general Kelly
were said well I have to report directly
to the president and he said to me no
you're fired that did not happen that
was fake news he fired me before I could
say anything actually so I mean that's
just the fact but but but the truth of
the matter is you're asking a really
good question and there has to be order
but there also has to be a little bit of
a political element to that job as well
because you got a job to do you've got
to prosecute the president's legislative
agenda in and and time is you know it
were like in Episode four Star Wars
remember the scene where Han Solo and
Luke Skywalker and the garbage compactor
is closing the walls are closing in now
because you're gonna run up against the
congressional elections in 2018 thanks
so much thank you for that question yeah
let's go to you the very back the blue
yeah are you hi um so to quote the
famous CS lewis who once said about
jesus he was either a liar or lunatic or
lord not to compare trump to jesus but i
think i think i think trump could be one
of three things he could either be a
liar who says what he thinks appeals to
his base just to get a left in he's
either a lunatic someone who's
sociopathic and incapable of behaving in
a normal fashion or he's a genius and
managed to manipulate the american
political system taking himself elected
and almost out of nowhere of those three
choices which one do you think he is
thank you
am I am I allowed to choose none of the
above or or I got to go with one of
those look look here's the thing that
you probably intuitively know that and
that's a really cool quote I've got to
look that up now and try to memorize it
but but at the end of the day the world
is not that absolute and it is not that
specific and neither are you
you're a complex organism and you don't
have to read Damien from Hermann Hesse
or Siddhartha to recognize how complex
you are that there's good parts of you
and there are bad parts of you and there
are good parts and bad parts of all of
us so so what I would say about the
president is that you have to accept
that he's a political genius if you
don't like him that's fine but you have
to look at the zero to the American
presidency in 19 months he started on
June 16th of 2015 19 short months later
he's the American president so you can't
say that there wasn't some level of
political skill and instinct and some
level of genius in terms of his judgment
and his skillset and his campaign style
now you may not agree with any of it but
you have to say okay here's the guy that
had no Secretary Clinton had 40 years
where the name recognition built up by
herself and President Clinton she was in
the public life for 40 years and this
was an American business person that 13
months short months later became the
American president so we have to yield
to him that he had some level of
political genius again you may not like
his form of genius he's definitely not a
sociopath and so you guys will snicker
at that because of the way the media
portrays him but I have been in the room
you know the Hamilton musical where
you're in the room where it happens and
let me tell you something about the
president he is way more contemplative
he is way more thoughtful he's way more
of a person that doesn't want to put
American troops in harm's way or bring
about Wars then you would think and even
if his Twitter feed is cantankerous or
is filled with some bellicosity in terms
of the rhetoric he's definitely not that
way I have seen that up close and
personal and what was the first one but
a liar
okay right well I want you to raise your
hand in the room if you're not a liar
raise your hand in the room okay so I
stand case closed on that one let's go
to the next question
I didn't hear someone said something
light in the air yeah let's go to you
and the gray hi thanks for like this
yeah and you just give what I want to
ask as someone with I guess experience
in sort of communication side of things
I want to ask what I think everyone in
the world wanted to know during the
campaign
how did Trump's campaign not sink when
there were so many things that would
have sunk anyone else's campaign be it
to do with his tax returns or leaked
audio tapes or allegations and court
cases Trump University what should have
derailed any candidate didn't yeah
from your perspective no experience this
is you know kind of your your profession
how did not sink okay so that's like a
really good question and I'm sure that
they'll be presidential historians that
right about that or campaign historians
are right about that for 100 years so I
can give you a field observation but I
also want to be very very honest and I
told Chris this earlier and some of the
Americans may know the answer to this
but how many times did Secretary Clinton
go to the state of Wisconsin during the
campaign okay so somebody said zero so
the first answer to your question is
Secretary Clinton had she deployed
herself differently in the campaign she
won the popular vote by I think three
and a half or four percent but there
were certain mission-critical states
that she needed to win to secure the
electoral college vote and so I just
submit this to you and again this is
hindsight now this is 20/20 hindsight so
I'm not trying to be smart out late
about this but you had the state of
Wisconsin that had a sitting Speaker of
the House who was a Republican and you
had a governor in West
that was winning in a blue state he won
the red the blue state of Wisconsin
three times he wanted the first time
then he had a recount and then he won
re-election and so I don't know who her
political operatives were I don't know
who the geniuses were on our side that
said hey you don't have to go to
Wisconsin its bluer than blue you don't
have to worry about it but the president
and then the candidate went sixteen
times so Wisconsin and so that's the
biggest thing I just again okay
now on the separate category which i
think is very seminal and somebody will
write about this from a historical
perspective that there is a desperation
in our society and I'll make a
confession to everybody in this room I
grew up in a blue-collar family and so
my dad ran a crane you ran a payloader
and they graduated to like weighing
trucks and then they eventually gave him
an inside desk job as he got older but I
priced my father's wages his 1975 wages
priced in 2015 through no fault of his
own we're down 40 percent so that's
through automated automation robotics a
surplus of labor all kinds of things
disrupted my non educated blue-collar
dad from being able to afford the
middle-class lifestyle that I grew up in
but I'm gonna make a confession to you
guys I insulated myself from that world
I went to Tufts and my parents thought
that Tufts was spelled T ough s they had
no clue okay and then I went to Harvard
Law School then I went into Goldman
Sachs and I started my ascent up the
spire of economic elitism
and I moved classes and became
financially independent and then I
started hanging out with people who were
very rich and the collective bias of
those people informed my opinion of what
was going on in the society and I can
tell you that a seminal moment for me
was May 23rd 2016 we were flying on
Trump Force One to Los Angeles and we
were making a campaign stop in
Albuquerque New Mexico
and we landed in Albuquerque New Mexico
the candidate got off the plane and and
we headed Secret Service Caravan to the
Albuquerque Civic Center there were
9,000 people waiting for him in the
Civic Center
there were 7,000 people waiting outside
now you know I was one of the campaign
aides so I had a Secret Service Day pin
on that meant if there was a commotion
they wouldn't shoot at me thank God
right but I took it off I put it in my
pocket when I crossed the security
perimeter and I went into the crowd and
I started asking questions they said you
know where are you from why are you here
can you tell me why you're here and one
gentleman said to me well I'm here
because I just lost my job the factory
just closed down my dad worked in that
factory for 33 years I worked there for
12 the United States lost seventy
thousand factories since the signing of
NAFTA again you could agree with NAFTA
or dip the groove that I'm just giving
you the numbers and so this Albuquerque
family the father now deceased 33 years
in the factory the son 12 years in the
factory is out of a job he's at the
Loews which is a Home Improvement Center
and he's delivering Domino's pizza at
night so he's got two jobs and he's on a
EBT card which is a form of social
welfare and he said that um economically
desperate I cannot raise my children in
this current economic environment now
I'm making a confession and you guys are
recording this you know 28 years having
departed Harvard Law School I was at a
touch I actually missed what was going
on in the middle class the working class
family that I grew up in was an
aspirational working class family my dad
was like you're gonna go to school
you're gonna go to law school
you're gonna start a business and you
two will share in part of the American
dream that family was desperation 'el so
we win in 40 years from aspirational to
desperation all and I'm gonna tell you
guys something I didn't see it
it took a billionaire living in a tower
on Fifth Avenue next to the Tiffany's
store to show it to me but Bernie
Sanders saw it and I told Chris to some
of his colleagues that there were 17 or
18 people in the campaign
there were only two candidates that saw
it was Bernie Sanders and Donald J Trump
and so when he went up against the
establishment candidate Secretary
Clinton again I don't dislike her and
you could never find me saying anything
bad about her on YouTube
I always argued policy I never said
anything mean spirited about her but why
the American people gave him a pass his
voters is that they were desperate for
change they really have felt that the
way maybe some of the people here in
Great Britain feel that the operational
community in the EU is out of touch with
the local worker many people in the
United States have felt that Washington
is actually out of touch with their
economic situation and so they gave him
a pass on everything because they viewed
him as not being a politician and they
viewed well somebody that could throw a
bomb in here and blow this thing up
that's gonna be good for me and my
family and so that's what I think
happened but I'm gonna tell you what if
she went to Wisconsin
not she if Secretary Clinton went to
Wisconsin two three or four times she
may have beaten him it may have been
that simple of an equation I know it's a
long-winded answer but I think it's very
important to you to understand that even
though I grew up in a family that
derived its roots from a blue-collar
neighborhood I too missed what was going
on in the society thank you
[Applause]
you stand up so my context is that I
sort of went to my undergrad in the
States Middlebury College in Vermont so
we can't leave Vermont without being a
bleeding-heart liberal which is what I
sort of am my question really is more of
a personal question to you I really
struggled to sort of understand sort of
like your political transition in the
sense that going from Obama to sort of
supporting Jeb Bush to Trump I I'm not
entirely sure what that was was it the
office was it the fact that he was
president and the power of the President
or was there some sort of like personal
charisma with Trump that you that spoke
specifically to you okay so so that's a
really good question so what I would say
is the anomaly and my political support
is actually President Obama that if you
went back to like me in college there
where I am today
the only deviation I made from the
Republican Party was President Obama
because there was a personal
relationship there and we knew each
other in law school and so I looked at
Perth and I into this day you know I
have a very good relationship with
President Obama and I respect him as a
person there were things that he did
politically that I disagreed with and so
I went back to my Republican roots after
you know supporting him the first time
as it relates to President Trump I sort
of said it I was with two other
candidates prior to the president but I
view myself as a team player played
played athletic sports my whole life and
I thought it was important to stay with
the party and stay with the team and so
I've known the president for a long time
I can't tell you that we were friends 20
years ago but I did make his
acquaintance 20 years ago we worked
together on the Romney campaign in 2012
and even though I didn't support him on
the first two two waves I did make a
commitment to him and to the Republican
Party that I was going to support the
eventual nominee had it been Ted Cruz I
would have supported him so and again
but I like the president so I'm not I'm
not somebody sitting here in this room
telling you that I just like the
president I do think and I said this
from the
pres podium which was sort of a lot of
fun by the way I mean it's not as you
guys are a lot better looking than
American journalists I can tell you that
but what I was sitting up there and I
took 46 minutes of questions and I said
what I really believe that that that
there's a spread between what he's
really like as a person and how he's
perceived by the media and also he's
doing some damage to himself in terms of
the way he's he's positioning himself
he's a he's a he's a he's a guy that you
would be if you got to know him you
would have a different opinion of him
and I would submit this to you that most
of these people and I could say this
about Secretary Clinton if you're a
Republican Republicans spent billions of
dollars mashing her into a
two-dimensional cartoon character she's
nothing like that and neither is he and
so what I would say is you've got to be
very very careful about the way you're
getting information from the media and
the way you're collecting your own
biases you know I just admitted to you
guys at 28 years of trying to get up the
economic Mountain I closed myself off
from a large part of the society
and I didn't really see what was going
on so so I'm not here as an apologist
for the president I can tell you things
that he's doing that you know I wish he
could do better and I can tell you
things that he's doing that I like but
in general he's a way better person then
most people perceive them to be
you don't like the answer I got that but
that's one but you're from Middlebury
Vermont so it's all right there's a lot
of a lot of Bernie Sanders support up
there yeah yes I don't know I might have
to pick up people are you the guys the
almost jumping off the seats or that
you're picking the answer in the coin
guy Thank You mr. scary Moochie you've
told us you mooch will you and I are
getting close
thanks the moocher said you told us to
be brave tonight seeing that we in
university so I'm going to be brave you
said that you didn't just like the
president you said you loved the
president I don't even think you said it
once I think you said about 10 times
maybe once a day all right so hold on I
said the times I said I love the
president actually matched the number of
days I was in office how about that
because I count that I said it 11 times
keep going that's true for me it's it's
it's it's difficult to comprehend now
you could love a man you to the world
appears very much a bigot to build a
wall to lead to mass deportations to
exit the climate Accord you spoke about
how your generation has given our
generation a broken society a broken
planet how is it that you can now say
you love this person and then ciamis the
entire evening and create distance
between yourself and the Trump
administration to me
I'm not wrong
[Music]
that was very good good job
I'm really not here to charm you you
know I'm here to talk to you from my
you from my heart and so you can
like what I'm saying or just like what
I'm saying and then I'll leave it up to
your intelligence to form your own
opinion I'm not here to charm you and
I'm not here to bring any distance
between me and the Trump administration
I declared my feelings for the president
and you have to understand so where'd
you grow up
where you from from South Africa okay so
in the Italian neighborhood that I grew
up in on Long Island we use the word
love a lot okay I also did this from the
podium I got roundly ridiculed for that
okay but that's like a gesture like see
you guys later not that big of a deal to
a guy like me I'm very comfortable in my
own skin so I've told a lot of people
that I love them you and I would have to
do a lot more courting after that
question for me to fall in love with you
but in general well I'm sort of not
either but that that but that that idiom
was used by me in a very natural way and
if obviously it got immediately
contorted by the press and all that
other stuff I didn't say the society was
broken that's not what I said I said
that there was a mantle about the
society is far from broken if you look
at the amount of wealth that's been
created in this society and you look at
the billions of people that have moved
from subsistence levels into some
standard of living globally the society
is far from broken there's an economic
miracle taking place on the world and
there is a world if we get the right
policies of economic abundance for
everybody so the societies far from
broken what I said was that
opportunities have been squandered by
the body politic in the West when they
were handed a baton from the greatest
generation that had to collaborate more
because they had common cause versus the
Cold War and they had common cause
versus common enemies now there's no
existential threat to the West or the
United States and we've broken up into
pieces and started fighting moreover if
you really know your history and since
you go to Oxford I'm assuming you do
there is a specter there's a specter of
nationalism that's taking place right
now and that typically happens after
you've had
a mortality of living memory of war you
can just go to barber Tuckman's book the
guns of August and you can see that that
happened in August of 1914 and it's
happening right now because there's no
political leaders that remember the
Second World War and so the Catalonians
want to break from Spain Great Britain
wants to leave the EU the Scots want to
leave the UK the Greeks want to leave
the EU we're fighting over the Spratly
Islands in in in Asia and there's a
systemic rise of nationalism with a lack
of historical context all of which is
frankly not being addressed properly by
your political leaders so so I'm open
about that I'm part of that failed
community I didn't I didn't say that I
got it right and these people got it
wrong I said to you I'm part of the
baby-boomer political class and I can
tell my other fellow baby-boomers in
this room that are not involved in
politics shame on you because it's
through your indifference that we've
gotten this level of extremists and this
level of polarity now you mentioned you
mentioned the environment and so let's
talk about the environment for a second
because I think this is important the
Paris Accord is a symbolic thing now if
you asked me point-blank what do I think
of the environment I've always answered
that very honestly I think that 60% of
what's happening is probably human
derived and it's probably from carbon
admission and changes that we've made
through our industrialization to the
Earth's atmosphere but geologically is
probably 40 percent being done from
where we are right now and the position
of the Earth from the Sun and so it's a
combination of those two things but if
anybody in this room thinks that the
Paris Accord is going to solve that it
doesn't do that because it changes the
centigrade tabulation by 0.3% people are
rapidly cheating inside the Accord and
so if you want to use the symbolism of
being in the Accord is like you're
standing on the right side of the
environment that's okay but it's I'm way
bigger problem than just staying in or
being outside of the Paris Accord so I'm
not trying to charm your brother okay
I'm trying to talk to you in a very
straight very plain way okay and by the
way your country
didn't do so well for about 50 60 years
okay in terms of apartheid and all the
nonsense and what I didn't do so long
apartheid in South Africa and seeing as
I do study at Oxford and I do know my
history was supported by Ronald Reagan
and the Reagan Reagan in fact in fact
since we're in York since 1960 a mirror
in your age they're trying to score
political points with your fellow
students and I respect that it doesn't
really have anything to do with me
anymore thing yeah that's okay nice
question let's go to your original
thank you mooch you mentioned that
Donald Trump is a genius but is he more
intelligent than Rex Tillerson
do I really have to answer that one I
was doing really great till the South
Africans showed up do I have to answer
that one I don't know making a joke you
don't have to be that upset I'm making
sure I don't know if he is or isn't but
here's what I would here's what I would
wish okay for us okay the Democrats that
personality differences I mean I'm
telling you they do okay we have to get
into the specific ones but where I
applaud the Democrats in my society they
go lockstep with each other
okay and they hang tough with each other
the Republicans are shooting at each
other
okay myself included by the way because
when shots are coming in at me I'm
shooting abandon or Priebus they're
shooting at me the the president me
Bannen Priebus we should probably dial
it down
he mentioned Ronald Reagan's all
mentioned as well the 11th commandment
that Ronald Reagan said about the
Republican Party is thou shalt not say
anything bad about a fellow Republican
and so we haven't lived to that we I'm
sorry and then he did about Gerald Ford
yeah well that's the hypocrisy of
politics but but but but I mean that's
what happens right that's why someone's
calling personal liar everyone in the
rooms lying so what do you want me to do
it's hypocrisy of politics and people
but but at the end of the day I don't
know if he's smarter than him or not but
I wish we would dial back the rhetoric
against each other I really do wish that
I think we have time for one more so
let's go to yeah you yeah you yeah you
just went out no no this is the other
that one sorry yeah
thank you earlier tonight you made an
excellent point about how we need more
collaboration and less division in
politics but you've also been describing
yourself as very much a team player
Republican do you not think it's that
kind of blind devotion the attitude of
my party right or wrong that's caused
that division in the first place okay so
again this is just I'm not trying to
parse this I just trying to explain like
and we were talking about this before I
came down to this beautiful hall it's
like if the president could have made a
move to go for education reform so he
comes out of the blocks January 21st
education is still one of the last
vestiges of bipartisanship and so he
could have made a move to get a small
win on the table with some kind of
legislative agenda item related to a
bipartisan commitment to evening and
making more fair the public education
system in our society and that would
have been a step towards more
bipartisanship and more community up on
the hill and so when when you say that
I'm blindly devoted I elected to take a
job to serve the president United States
he's the commander-in-chief and so
therefore I feel this way that I had to
subordinate myself publicly to the
agenda of the administration that's not
to say that in a private room or in a
private setting that I wasn't giving my
viewpoint on things like the transgender
situation in the military or than I
wasn't giving my viewpoint on where I
thought we needed to be with the
Democrats in terms of securing some help
from the Democrats a lot of you are not
from the United States but I can tell
you that if you want real tax reform in
the United States you need a bipartisan
coalition to get that done we have never
done that without a bipartisan coalition
so the tax the taxes came into place in
1913 the income taxes they were reformed
one time in the mid 50's by the
Eisenhower administration and then it
took Ronald Reagan in his second term
after winning 49 states to get the 1986
tax reform pass
he had to do it with a coalition of
Democrats so so oh yeah and I'm not
trying to split the baby here I'm just
trying to say to you I'm a team player
but I believe that my team if you're
asking me my honest opinion my team
should stand for more collaboration we
we have no choice
the system was set up by the original
documents and the founding fathers and
mothers of the country to make sure that
you'd never got a full loaf you Reagan
said and I know he's come here he said
he would go for 80% of something as
opposed to a hundred percent I think
we've made mistakes doing that on both
sides so that was the point I was trying
to make thank you thank you great thank
you so much Anthony joining us please
join me in thanking Anthony
you